# BLOG: PRECISE-IHCC reflections

Held from 21-23 Aug, the PRECISE-IHCC meeting was touted by many in attendance as the best showcase of all work that goes into setting up and running biobanks all across the world, and efforts to extract findings of clinical significance from the data gathered.

There were lessons to learn from everyone- from the resourcefulness of researchers working in resource-limited settings, to the commitment that scientists operating in more well-endowed contexts displayed to engaging under-represented communities whose participation is required to illuminate aspects of human biology that no large study of majority populations can capture.

The range of topics represented at the conference was diverse but relevant. I appreciated having a start-to-finish view of the whole process of setting up a biobank, beginning with garnering the necessary regulatory approval, to creating the infrastructure required to host the flow of a few petabytes of data, to helping people become excited and engaged in the cause and agree to participate in the research. Beyond the plethora of findings and papers that were coming out of these initiatives shared, many of the panellists were candid in sharing the challenges that they faced in their local setting. Even enroute to garnering nationwide support for genomics research, there were clinicians who witnessed the life-saving potential of genomics research in their day to day practice and shared poignant stories that they hold dear to as their personal answers to the question “Is it worth it to do this at all, if we don’t have the expertise like XXX country does or the governmental support like YYY country does?”

This is a question that I’m constantly beset with, as an early career researcher. Sometimes, it’s all too easy to be fixated on limitations and question the value of my research. The allure of tending to complex analyses easily overshadows the tedious and mundane nature of QC, housekeeping, rigorous statistical tests— when these are the actual engines of long-term success. Listening to the conference speakers go over the nuts and bolts of building cohort studies that meet clinical needs reminded me that anything worth doing is worth doing slowly and steadily: whether that be fixing a bug in a program (in one country’s experience, a bug in the national variant caller had led to a patient being mistakenly detected as not having a genetic cause for disease, only to be revealed as a false negative by a later resequencing effort), or building trust with a community one person at a time.

This conference was also personally significant, being the first time I gave an oral presentation about my work on dilated cardiomyopathy at the Early Career Investigators’ (ECI) session on the first day. To be honest, I went in feeling a little small coming into to the ECI session straight from an amazing morning of opening-day plenary lectures. But thinking about the many little right decisions the speakers shared about that paved the way to eventual breakthrough and impactful results gave me confidence to share about my own work in a nascent field. While the small sample size in my investigation and computationally-focused experimental design did not allow me to make claims of identifying causal disease mechanisms, I was able to share my experience with a diverse range of multi-omics technologies to maximise biological insight within the data that I did have available. Not overclaiming my findings and focusing instead on the methodology helped the audience to accurately assess the implications of my research. After the talk, clinicians and students came up to inquire more details about the methodologies that I had shared about, expressing a keenness to learn and utilize these strategies for their analyses. It was heartening to see that my talk had introduced new lenses through which they could look at the data that they had on hand. Additionally, I treasured the opportunity to direct them to resources which I found to be of greatest help in grasping more complex concepts or even software. The thought that I had somehow played a role in accelerating their learning, in that they did not have to make the same mistakes as I had, was satisfying

Following the end of PRECISE-IHCC 2024, I found myself returning to work with: a fresh resolve to stay faithful in whatever research task my hands find to do, even and especially when I cannot see their end. I also find myself brimming with ideas to take my research forward, while having a renewed appreciation for small beginnings that I believe will give me joy to work well with whatever I have on hand, instead of wishing or waiting for the ideal circumstance.