# Habits of great scientists: Reflections from my first multidisciplinary summit

Earlier this month, LKCMedicine gave me the privilege of attending the annual Global Young Scientists Summit (GYSS), organized by the [National Research Foundation, Singapore.](https://gyss.nrf.gov.sg/)  Although eager to engage with a luminous panel of eminent scientists—including Nobel laureates, Turing award, and Fields Medal winners —I’d been skeptical about the practical benefits that attending a multidisciplinary summit could bring. GYSS happened on the week right before a major presentation that was weighing heavily on my mind. Nonetheless, I wanted to honor the opportunity that was given to me by attending the sessions wholeheartedly, and I certainly did not regret that!  I didn’t hear much about methylation changes in chronic disease (which is the focus of my thesis), but I did glean loads of practical handles on conducting good, life-changing science. These have put me in better stead to do my research well, and to have fun while I’m at it! 

GYSS 2024 was a meet-and-greet between young scientists and the people they’ve only read about in textbooks: multiple eminent researchers who have been conferred the most prestigious awards in their respective fields. During the five-day summit, young scientists asked these leading minds for their perspectives on the trajectory of a plethora of disciplines, including healthcare and therapeutics, quantum technologies, forensic science, sustainable energy solutions as well as computer science. 

But it wasn’t just about science:  because of the multidisciplinary nature of GYSS, presentations were not as technical as those at typical scientific conferences. The invited speakers saw themselves as mentors of soon-to-be movers and shakers in science, generously sharing their experiences on successful grant applications as well as tender advice on how to pursue one’s dreams with fervor while doing other important things in life just as well. They also opened up about the routes they took to discovery, only bringing technical domain knowledge when it was needed to to flesh out what being a good scientist looked like in practice.  Collectively, our scientific heroes broke down the momentous occasion of winning the Nobel prize into daily habits that they’ve cultivated over decades. This blog post is me clobbering my favourite advice together. It is no formula to winning a Nobel Prize, more than it is a trove of good advice and quotable quotes for maximising fulfilment and enjoyment in the business of discovery. Throughout the conference, I paid special attention to how: 

## **They put in the effort to find common ground**

Glancing through the GYSS programme before the summit, I’d thought that I would gain most from the plenaries— keynotes by the scientific luminaries themselves, people whom I esteemed as having ‘arrived’ at the pinnacle of scientific success. But what ended up as a personal highlight was having had ample opportunity to mingle with research peers from more than 30 countries. The success of a multi-disciplinary conference like this lay in the willingness of each and every single participant and speaker putting themselves out there to find common ground. There was no assumed knowledge about any domain and the the only common denominator for engaging exchanges was *curiosity.* This conference, and the peers I met, taught me that curiosity was a quality that could be cultivated.

The first time I felt challenged to expand this narrow perception of people whom I could be inspired by was at a town hall held by my school for Ph.D. students in November 2023. The Ph.D. programs director shared how the people she had known in her Ph.D. days had now become people of influence in the scientific community in various capacities— professors, journal editors, and venture capitalists, to name a few. “The people that will be helping you... will be your generation. So it’s worth investing time here (in peer support). Peer support will go a long way,” she urged.  Fast forward to GYSS, her words became my call to action, to deeply engage and value each interaction with the peers I met.

At GYSS, the Young Scientists Quickfire Pitch sessions and poster presentations helped to grow my curiosity and vocabulary for holding conversations with peers from other disciplines.  NRF ensured a diverse representation of research fields amongst attendees, which made it quite difficult for someone to stay within their comfort zone. Nuclear engineers,  material scientists, and biologists sat together at lunch, took an interest in each other’s research, and made an effort to find common ground. From only being able to manage an “oh, that’s interesting” when a peer introduced what they were working on, each of us got better at having insightful conversations as the days went by. I developed a friendship with a computer scientist who is improving the quality and customisability of audio descriptions that accompany videos for people who have trouble seeing them.  I’ve found that the more I valued and engaged in conversations with the other young scientists I met, the more curious I became, and the more common ground emerged.  For instance, I, a biologist trying to self-learning programming, and my new friend, a computer scientist trying to apply psychological frameworks, faced similar challenges in interdisciplinary research and could draw solace and inspiration from each other’s experiences. 

While attending the various conference sessions, I also enjoyed building up a vocabulary bank of keywords from different fields and using them in lunchtime conversations with the new friends I met. This felt quite like learning a new language: my peers and I had fun correcting one another when we misunderstood terms or concepts that lay in each other’s domains.

## **They balanced passion and practicality**

The conference featured ample panel sessions surrounding the realities of practicing science: speakers spoke candidly about how to secure big grants (cross-collaborate, start writing proposals early because great ideas don’t come on command but are more likely a combination of smaller ones), and tenderly about how to keep doing good science even when plans fall apart. An attendee who expressed concern about the low number of faculty positions in comparison to the large number of graduates was encouraged to expand her perspectives on where she could make an impact, beyond the university setting. Theoretical physicist Prof Duncan Haldane, whose mathematical model has opened up new areas of research that impact quantum computing, opined that the value of Ph.D. training is more far-reaching than the confines of any institution since it develops independent thinkers able to “formulate a project and do useful things throughout society.” Should doors to a desired career trajectory not open, Prof Haldane urged the audience to take matters in their stride and have confidence that their Ph.D. training equips them to make an impact in whatever capacity they find themselves operating in. 

A practical time management strategy that allows for pursuing the projects that one feels most strongly about while meeting the requirements for career advancement as a working scientist was given by Prof Adi Shamir, one of the leading contributors to the modern cryptography system that secures online transactions. Prof. Shamir spends 25% of his time on what he calls 'moonshots.' While these incredibly challenging problems might end up being "a waste of time," they are the ones that, if solved, will reap the largest rewards. Another 25% of Prof. Shamir’s time is spent on 'frivolous' problems, including quizzes and games that are "unlikely to lead to publishable papers" but can generate new ideas and ways of solving problems. The remaining 50% of his time is spent on problems of 'medium complexity,' which he defines as those that will “be bulk of your CV and lead to publishable results.” The essence of Prof. Shamir’s advice was captured in a one-line summary which he gave: “Don’t forget to work on the extremely hard, but also play with science!”

## **They prepared for serendipity**

The speakers repeatedly acknowledge serendipity as a key factor underlying the successful moonshots they took. Yet each labored hard to construct an optimal environment for the serendipitous to happen. Japanese physicist Takaaki Kajita did this quite literally, building detectors in a mine and a mountain for examining invisible subatomic particles— that may explain why the universe as we know it can exist under improbable conditions. En route to a breakthrough, which often shows up unexpectedly, the speakers highlighted the importance of just doing the next thing well— no matter how mundane. Prof. Sir Richard Roberts recounted how embracing rather than dismissing failure led to his Nobel Prize-winning discovery of split genes, fundamentally changing our understanding of genetic mutations in evolution, cancers, and congenital diseases. “The discovery for which I won the Nobel Prize was strictly because a really clever experiment that I thought of failed, and we tried to work out why, and ended up making a huge discovery.”  Like many others, Prof. Roberts acknowledged that breakthroughs happen by time and chance, but advises, “When things fail, always do a postmortem and find out why, it’s worth it.”

## **They find ways to grow their tribe**

More impressive than the speakers’ scientific achievements was their commitment to cultivating the same interest that they had for science in the next generation. The GYSS organizers gave such weight to science communication that they made it the opening plenary of the event. More impressive than the speakers’ scientific achievements was their commitment to cultivating the same interest that they had for science in the next generation and helping anyone who wanted to learn, get onto the same page. Biochemist Prof Aaron Ciechanover, who was part of a trio that discovered ubiquitination, has regularly visited elementary schools to impart a love for science to the children there. To Prof. Ciechanover, science communication is both an obligation and pleasure, and there is little excuse not to do it: time can be set aside for science communication once scientists are convinced of its value, and there is always an abundance of topics that one can discuss.  He cites the revolutionary COVID-19 mRNA vaccine which has far-reaching implications for cancer and other diseases. “We can explain it to the kids... they’ve witnessed COVID-19, they were enclosed at home and isolated, they know what it is.” Prof. Ciechanover is convinced that explaining science to children will reap rewards.  “When explaining it to them, some will catch it, some will struggle with it, but at least something will precipitate in their brains. Everybody complains that young people are not attracted to science anymore, but how else will we attract them if not by coming and talking to them, and explaining to them the beauty and wonders of it?” 

Reflecting on the challenges of stimulating interest in more esoteric fields, a plant biologist-cum-mathematician asked the panel for advice on how he could get children interested in the kind of science that he pursued. His question was playfully directed by panel moderator Dr, Juliana Chan to Dame Sue Black, whose practice of forensic anthropology made her the “cool scientist” in the room. I felt my heart immediately fasten onto Dame Sue Black’s response: “It comes to you in many ways, when you do a face-to-face outreach, it’s about the relationship that you build with them: (when they) stop looking at you as a particular beast and see you as yourself, that’s when (what you do) becomes cool.”

## **Getting the most out of a multidisciplinary summit**

Certainly, I had gained more than I expected from this summit. But going forward, I also see that there are things that I could have done more, and more things that I can do, to increase my capacity to enjoy an even more enriching experience. If you’re attending GYSS or another multidisciplinary conference, doing these things might just level-up your experience:

- **Attend plenaries with new friends from different disciplines:** my peers were able to catch what I could not, and hearing about what enlivens them about the subject did whet my appetite for it.
- **Present your work at pitch and poster sessions:** during GYSS, cross-collaboration was frequently mentioned as being of utmost importance for doing impactful science and for securing major grants. Pitch and poster sessions, especially in a multidisciplinary setting, are great opportunities to receive insights from scientists from different fields that can save you from being stuck in a rut.
- **Read up on the speaker’s seminal and most recent works before the sessions:** even if you’ve only got time for the title or abstract, that can go a long way! Doing this can stretch your capacity to retain concepts.

## Ending thoughts

Despite how different our day-to-days might look, we scientists have much in common at a fundamental level. Our best, most valuable contributions to the world around us are born of the joy of discovery and the companionship of like-minded peers. I started out doubting the practical value of a multidisciplinary summit, but at its close I find myself thinking, there is nothing more practical than setting time aside to deeply engage with our core motivations for doing what we do, with the help of those who’ve gone ahead of us and those who’re called to walk alongside us.

## **Resources**

- GYSS is an annual summit. If you’re interested to register for an upcoming one, you can find more information at : [https://gyss.nrf.gov.sg/about/about/](https://gyss.nrf.gov.sg/about/about/)
- Full recordings of the GYSS 2024 sessions, including some mentioned in this post, are available here: [https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC9ShCzU_PIhd-58M1kwudag](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC9ShCzU_PIhd-58M1kwudag)